<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Synchronous vs Asynchronous

As its base JavaScript language is synchronous. Synchronous means the code runs in a particular sequence of instructions given in the program. Each instruction waits for the previous instruction to complete its execution.

```js
console.log("First");
console.log("Second");
console.log("Third");

/*
OUTPUT:
First
Second
Third
*/
```

Due to this nature of synchronous programming, sometimes important instructions get blocked due to some previous instructions, which causes a delay in the user interface. Asynchronous code execution allows to execute next instructions immediately and doesn't block the flow because of previous instructions.

<span style="color: Cyan;">Asynchronous programming</span> is a technique that enables your program to start a potentially long-running task and still be able to be responsive to other events while that task runs, rather than having to wait until that task has finished. Once that task has finished, your program is presented with the result. Many functions provided by browsers, especially the most interesting ones, can potentially take a long time, and therefore, are asynchronous. For example: `fetch`, `setTimeout`, `setInterval`, etc.

```js
console.log("First");
setTimeout(() => console.log("Second"), 2000);
console.log("Third");

/* 
OUTPUT: 
First
Third
Second
*/
```

Any computation required to be done requires processor for our JavaScript engine to get the job done. Many requests interact with things outside the processor. For example: they may communicate over a network or request data from storage disk. We don't want our processor to sit idle when such things are happening. That's where asynchronous programming enters.

There are 2 mechanisms in JavaScript for handling asynchronous operations:

- Callbacks: In event handlers or Browser APIs (like setTimeout, setInterval, etc)
- Promises

<br>

# Callback Functions

The description we just saw of asynchronous functions might remind you of event handlers, and if it does, you'd be right. Event handlers are really a form of asynchronous programming: you provide a function (the event handler) that will be called, not right away, but whenever the event happens. If "the event" is "the asynchronous operation has completed", then that event could be used to notify the caller about the result of an asynchronous function call.

An event handler is a particular type of callback. A <span style="color: Gold;">callback</span> is just a function that's passed into another function, with the expectation that the callback will be called at the appropriate time. Callbacks used to be the main way asynchronous functions were implemented in JavaScript.

```js
const numArr = [1, 2];
// Suppose it's an API call which takes 3 seconds
const addNum = (callback) =>
  setTimeout(() => {
    numArr.push(3);
    callback();
  }, 2000);
// And it's an API call which takes 1 second
const showNumArr = () => setTimeout(() => console.log(numArr), 1000);
addNum(showNumArr);
```

Here we cannot call `showNumArr` function separately after `addNum` because former is taking just 1 sec while latter is taking 3. So former will get exacuted and array will be displayed while latter will remain in execution. That's where callback function comes into picture. <br>
<span style="color: Chartreuse;">Callbacks are generally used to continue the execution after completing an asynchronous operation - such are referred to as the asynchronous callbacks.</span>

However, callback-based code can get hard to understand when the callback itself has to call functions that accept a callback. This is a common situation if you need to perform some operation that breaks down into a series of asynchronous functions. For example, consider the following:

```js
const doStep1 = (init) => init + 1;

const doStep2 = (init) => init + 2;

const doStep3 = (init) => init + 3;

function doOperation() {
  let result = 0;
  result = doStep1(result);
  result = doStep2(result);
  result = doStep3(result);
  console.log(`result: ${result}`);
}

doOperation();
```

Here we have a single operation that's split into three steps, where each step depends on the last step. In our example, the first step adds 1 to the input, the second adds 2, and the third adds 3. Starting with an input of 0, the end result is 6 (0 + 1 + 2 + 3). As a synchronous program, this is very straightforward. But what if we implemented the steps using callbacks?

```js
function doStep1(init, callback) {
  const result = init + 1;
  callback(result);
}

function doStep2(init, callback) {
  const result = init + 2;
  callback(result);
}

function doStep3(init, callback) {
  const result = init + 3;
  callback(result);
}

function doOperation() {
  doStep1(0, (result1) => {
    doStep2(result1, (result2) => {
      doStep3(result2, (result3) => {
        console.log(`result: ${result3}`);
      });
    });
  });
}

doOperation();
```

Because we have to call callbacks inside callbacks, we get a deeply nested `doOperation()` function, which is much harder to read and debug. This is sometimes called `"callback hell"` or the "pyramid of doom" (because the indentation looks like a pyramid on its side).

When we nest callbacks like this, it can also get very hard to handle errors: often you have to handle errors at each level of the "pyramid", instead of having error handling only once at the top level.

For these reasons, most modern asynchronous APIs don't use callbacks. Instead, the foundation of asynchronous programming in JavaScript is the <b style="color:Salmon;">Promise</b>.

<br>

# Promises

Promises in real-life express a trust between two or more persons and an assurance that a particular thing will surely happen. In javascript, a Promise is an object which ensures to produce a single value in the future (when required). Promise in javascript is used for managing and tackling asynchronous operations.<br>
<b style="color: lightblue;">Promise allows us to associate handlers with an asynchronous action's eventual success value or failure reason.</b> This lets asynchronous methods return values like synchronous methods: instead of immediately returning the final value, the asynchronous method returns a promise to supply the value at some point in the future.<br>
A Promise is in one of these states:

- `pending`: the promise has been created, and the asynchronous function it's associated with has not succeeded or failed yet.
- `fulfilled`: the asynchronous function has succeeded. When a promise is fulfilled, its `then()` handler is called.
- `rejected`: the asynchronous function has failed. When a promise is rejected, its `catch()` handler is called.

The eventual state of a pending promise can either be fulfilled with a value or rejected with a reason (error). When either of these options occur, the associated handlers queued up by a promise's `then` method are called. This method takes two arguments, a callback for success and another for failure. Both are optional, so you can add a callback for success or failure only. A promise is said to be settled if it is either fulfilled or rejected, but not pending. When multiple callbacks can be included by invoking `then()` many times, each of them will be executed in a chain, i.e., one after the other, following the sequence in which they were inserted.

```js
const fetchFruitsPromise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    const errorOccured = true;
    const response = ["Banana", "Mango", "Grapes"];
    const error = "Unexpected occurred!";
    if (!errorOccured) resolve(response);
    else reject(error);
  }, 1000);
});
fetchFruitsPromise.then(
  (response) => console.log("Promise Resolved! Response - ", response),
  (error) => console.log("Something went wrong! Error - ", error)
);
```

`catch` and `finally` methods are an alternate method of handling rejected promises. Both of them just call `then()`(subclassing supported). Like promise in above code can be resolved like this also.

```js
fetchFruitsPromise.then((response) => console.log("Himanshu: Thanks for resolving promise! Response - ", response)).catch((error) => console.log("Himanshu: Very bad bro! Error - ", error));
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Constructor of promise:</h3>

The `Promise()` constructor is used to create a new promise object, which represents the eventual completion (or failure) of an asynchronous operation and its resulting value. It takes a single function as an argument. We'll call this function the `executor`. When you create a new promise you supply the implementation of the executor.

This executor function itself takes two arguments, which are both also functions, and which are conventionally called `resolve` and `reject`. In your executor implementation, you call the underlying asynchronous function. If the asynchronous function succeeds, you call `resolve`, and if it fails, you call `reject`. If the executor function throws an error, `reject` is called automatically. You can pass a single parameter of any type into `resolve` and `reject`.

Syntax: <span style="color: Yellow;">new Promise(executor);</span>

<b style="color:red;">🚨 NOTE-1: 🚨</b> **<i>A promise can be resolved or rejected only once. That means, once `resolve` or `reject` method is called, the promise goes in `settled` state and all subsequent calls to those functions are ignored. They can be called when the state of promise is `pending`.</i>**

<b style="color:LightGreen;">🟢 NOTE-2: 🟢</b> **<i>Even if the promise is settled by calling `resolve` or `reject`, the execution of the function inside the `Promise` constructor continues. Promises handle the state internally, but they don't control or interrupt the flow of the function they are in.</i>**

With a promise-based API (like `fetch`), the asynchronous function starts the operation and returns a `Promise` object. You can then attach handlers to this promise object, and these handlers will be executed when the operation has succeeded or failed.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Chaining promises</h3>

With the `fetch()` API, once you get a `Response` object, you need to call another function to get the response data. In this case, we want to get the response data as JSON, so we would call the `json()` method of the `Response` object. It turns out that `json()` is also asynchronous. So this is a case where we have to call two successive asynchronous functions.

```js
const fetchPromise = fetch("https://mdn.github.io/learning-area/javascript/apis/fetching-data/can-store/products.json");

fetchPromise.then((response) => {
  const jsonPromise = response.json();
  jsonPromise.then((data) => {
    console.log(data[0].name);
  });
});
```

But wait! Remember we said that by calling a callback inside another callback, we got successively more nested levels of code? And we said that this "callback hell" made our code hard to understand? Isn't this just the same, only with `then()` calls?

It is, of course. But the elegant feature of promises is that <i style="color: Crimson;"><span style="color: Orange;">then()</span> itself returns a promise, which will be completed with the result of the function passed to it.</i> This means that we can (and certainly should) rewrite the above code like this:

**<u>CHECKOUT THIS LEETCODE QUESTION:** https://leetcode.com/problems/add-two-promises/ </u>

```js
const fetchPromise = fetch("https://mdn.github.io/learning-area/javascript/apis/fetching-data/can-store/products.json");

fetchPromise
  .then((response) => {
    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`HTTP error: ${response.status}`);
    }
    return response.json();
  })
  .then((data) => {
    console.log(data[0].name);
  });
```

Instead of calling the second `then()` inside the handler for the first `then()`, we can return the promise returned by `json()`, and call the second `then()` on that return value. This is called <u style="color: Cyan;">promise chaining</u> and means we can avoid ever-increasing levels of indentation when we need to make consecutive asynchronous function calls.

If you add `catch()` to the end of a promise chain, then it will be called when any of the asynchronous function calls fail. So you can implement an operation as several consecutive asynchronous function calls, and have a single place to handle all errors.

```js
const fetchPromise = fetch(
  "bad-scheme://mdn.github.io/learning-area/javascript/apis/fetching-data/can-store/products.json",
);

fetchPromise
  .then((response) => {
    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`HTTP error: ${response.status}`);
    }
    return response.json();
  })
  .then((data) => {
    console.log(data[0].name);
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.error(`Could not get products: ${error}`);
  });
```

<u>**SUMMARY**</u>

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Promise.prototype.then()</b>: The `then()` method of `Promise` instances takes up to two arguments: callback functions for the fulfilled and rejected cases of the `Promise`. It stores the callbacks within the promise it is called on and immediately returns another Promise object, allowing you to chain calls to other promise methods.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Promise.prototype.catch()</b>: The `catch()` method of `Promise` instances schedules a function to be called when the promise is rejected. It immediately returns another `Promise` object, allowing you to chain calls to other promise methods. <u>It is a shortcut for `then(undefined, onRejected)`</u>.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Promise.prototype.finally()</b>: The `finally()` method of `Promise` instances schedules a function to be called when the promise is settled (either fulfilled or rejected). It immediately returns another `Promise` object, allowing you to chain calls to other promise methods.

<br>

## Important methods in Promise

<b style="color: Salmon;">1. Promise.resolve</b>:

It is a static method available on the Promise object in JavaScript. It returns a new promise object that is resolved with the given value. If the value is a promise itself, it returns the given promise as-is, without creating a new promise.<br>

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.resolve(value)</span>

`value`: The value with which the returned promise will be resolved. It can be any JavaScript value, including a promise.

1. Resolving with non-promise value:<br>
   ```js
   let promise = Promise.resolve("Hello");
   promise.then(function (value) {
     console.log(value); // Output: Hello
   });
   ```
2. Resolving with promise value:<br>

   ```js
   let innerPromise = new Promise(function (resolve) {
     setTimeout(function () {
       resolve("World");
     }, 1000);
   });

   let promise = Promise.resolve(innerPromise);
   promise.then(function (value) {
     console.log(value); // Output: World
   });
   ```

<b style="color: Salmon;">2. Promise.reject</b>:

It returns a new promise object that is rejected with the specified reason. This reason typically represents an error or failure condition that occurred during the execution of an asynchronous operation. If you pass a promise to it, the returned promise will be rejected with the same reason (or error) as the promise you passed.<br>

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.reject(reason);</span>

`reason`: The reason for rejecting the promise. It can be any JavaScript value, such as an error object, a string, or any other value that provides context about why the promise was rejected.

```js
let promise = Promise.reject(new Error("Failed to fetch data"));
promise.catch(function (reason) {
  console.error(reason.message); // Output: Failed to fetch data
});
```

It is commonly used to create a promise that is immediately rejected with a predefined error or failure condition. It can be useful for signaling failure in asynchronous operations or for propagating errors in promise chains.

<b style="color: Salmon;">3. Promise.all</b>:

It is used to wait for multiple promises to fulfill and returns a single promise that resolves when all of the input promises have been fulfilled, or it immediately rejects if any of the input promises reject.<br>

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.all(iterable);</span>

`iterable`: An iterable (such as an array) containing the promises to be awaited.

The returned promise will be fulfilled with an array of values corresponding to the fulfillment values of the input promises, in the same order as the input promises. If any of the input promises reject, the returned promise will be immediately rejected with the reason of the first promise that was rejected.

```js
let promise1 = new Promise(function (resolve, reject) {
  setTimeout(function () {
    resolve("First resolved");
  }, 1000);
});

let promise2 = new Promise(function (resolve, reject) {
  setTimeout(function () {
    resolve("Second resolved");
  }, 2000);
});

let promise3 = new Promise(function (resolve, reject) {
  setTimeout(function () {
    resolve("Third resolved");
  }, 3000);
});

Promise.all([promise1, promise2, promise3])
  .then(function (values) {
    console.log(values); // Output: ["First resolved", "Second resolved", "Third resolved"]
  })
  .catch(function (reason) {
    console.error(reason);
  });
```

If any of the promises reject (which doesn't happen in this example), the `.catch()` method would be called with the rejection reason.

<b style="color: Salmon;">4. Promise.allSettled</b>:

It is used to wait for all promises in an iterable to settle (fulfill or reject), and returns a single promise that resolves with an array of objects once all input promises have settled.

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.allSettled(iterable);</span>

The returned promise will be fulfilled with an array of objects, where each object represents the outcome of each input promise. Each object has the following properties:

- `status`: A string indicating the status of the promise, either "fulfilled" if the promise was fulfilled, or "rejected" if the promise was rejected.
- `value`: The fulfillment value of the promise if it was fulfilled, or the rejection reason if it was rejected.

```js
let promise1 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve("First resolved");
  }, 1000);
});

let promise2 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    reject("Second rejected");
  }, 2000);
});

let promise3 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve("Third resolved");
  }, 3000);
});

Promise.allSettled([promise1, promise2, promise3]).then((results) => {
  console.log(results);
  /*
  Output:
  [
    { status: 'fulfilled', value: 'First resolved' },
    { status: 'rejected', reason: 'Second rejected' },
    { status: 'fulfilled', value: 'Third resolved' }
  ]
  */
});
```

It is useful when you want to wait for multiple promises to complete regardless of their outcomes, and you need to inspect each promise's result individually. It allows you to handle a mixed array of fulfilled and rejected promises gracefully.

<b style="color: Salmon;">5. Promise.any</b>:

It is used to wait for the first promise in an iterable to fulfill, and then it returns that promise's value (fulfilled value). If all promises in the iterable reject, it returns a single promise that rejects with an `AggregateError` object containing information about all the rejections.

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.any(iterable);</span>

```js
const failure = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  reject("Always fails");
});

Promise.any([failure]).catch((err) => {
  console.log(err);
});
// AggregateError: No Promise in Promise.any was resolved
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">6. Promise.race</b>:

It is used to wait for the first promise in an iterable to settle (fulfill or reject), and then it returns that promise's value (fulfilled value) or rejection reason.

Syntax: <span style="color: Chartreuse;">Promise.race(iterable);</span>

The returned promise will be settled (fulfilled or rejected) as soon as the first promise in the iterable settles. If the first settled promise is fulfilled, the returned promise will be fulfilled with that promise's value. If the first settled promise is rejected, the returned promise will be rejected with that promise's rejection reason.

```js
let promise1 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve("First resolved");
  }, 1000);
});

let promise2 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    reject("Second rejected");
  }, 2000);
});

let promise3 = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    resolve("Third resolved");
  }, 3000);
});

Promise.race([promise1, promise2, promise3])
  .then((value) => {
    console.log(value); // Output: First resolved
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.error(error); // This will not execute in this example
  });
```

<br>

## Async/Await

<div style="text-decoration: underline; font-weight: bold">Async:</div>

The keyword `async` before a function makes the function return a promise. Other values (non-promise ones) are wrapped in a resolved promise automatically. In below given code `myFunction1` and `myFunction2` are same. <span style="color: Coral;">If nothing is returned, JS automatically wraps it in a promise which is resolved with `undefined` value.</span>

```js
async function myFunction1() {
  return "Hello";
}
function myFunction2() {
  return Promise.resolve("Hello");
}
```

It simply allows us to write promises-based code as if it was synchronous and it checks that we are not breaking the execution thread. It operates asynchronously via the event loop. Async functions will always return a value.<br><br>

<div style="text-decoration: underline; font-weight: bold">Await:</div> 

`await` keyword could be used within the `async` block only. It makes the code wait until the promise returns a result. `await` expressions make promise-returning functions behave as though they're synchronous by suspending execution of that `async` function until the returned promise is fulfilled or rejected. The resolved value of the promise is treated as the return value of the `await` expression. Use of `async` and `await` enables the use of ordinary `try / catch` blocks around asynchronous code.

<span style="color: pink;">If a promise resolves normally, then `await` promise returns the result. But in the case of a rejection, it throws the error, just as if there were a `throw` statement at that line. We can catch that error using `try..catch` block.</span>

```js
async function f() {
  try {
    let promise = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
      setTimeout(() => resolve("done!"), 1000);
    });
    let result = await promise; // wait until the promise resolves (*)
    console.log(result); // "done!"
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
}

f();
```

The function execution “pauses” at the line (\*) and resumes when the promise settles, with result becoming its result. So the code above shows `“done!”` in one second.

Let’s emphasize: `await` literally suspends the function execution until the promise settles, and then resumes it with the promise result. That doesn’t cost any CPU resources, because the JavaScript engine can do other jobs in the meantime: execute other scripts, handle events, etc. It’s just a more elegant syntax of getting the promise result than `promise.then`. And, it’s easier to read and write.

<span style="color: Coral;">If we try to use await in a non-async function, there would be a syntax error.</span>

<span style="color: Gold;">async/await works well with Promise.all.</span> When we need to wait for multiple promises, we can wrap them in `Promise.all` and then `await`:

```js
// wait for the array of results
let results = await Promise.all([
  fetch(url1),
  fetch(url2),
  // ...
]);
```

<b style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">In modern browsers, `await` on top level works just fine, when we’re inside a module.</b>

```js
// we assume this code runs at top level, inside a module
let response = await fetch("/article/promise-chaining/user.json");
let user = await response.json();

console.log(user);
```

<div style="border: 2px solid Coral; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(55, 104, 24, 0.49);">

Keep in mind that just like a promise chain, `await` forces asynchronous operations to be completed in series. This is necessary if the result of the next operation depends on the result of the last one, but if that's not the case then something like `Promise.all()` will be more performant.
</div>

</div>
