<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

JavaScript programs started off pretty small — most of its usage in the early days was to do isolated scripting tasks, providing a bit of interactivity to your web pages where needed, so large scripts were generally not needed.

Fast forward a few years and we now have complete applications being run in browsers with a lot of JavaScript, as well as JavaScript being used in other contexts (Node.js, for example). Complex projects necessitate a mechanism for splitting JavaScript programs into separate modules that can be imported when needed because:

- JavaScript files included via `<script>` tags often lead to global `namespace pollution` and order-dependent loading.
- Managing such huge scripts became cumbersome.
- Code duplications were unavoidable.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">All the ways of doing modular programming</h3>

<b style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">1. CommonJS (Node.js): </b> Around 2009, `Node.js` adopted `CommonJS` for server-side JavaScript, introducing the <span style="color: rgb(230, 192, 123);">module.exports</span> and <span style="color: rgb(230, 192, 123);">require()</span> syntax for module management. This was synchronous and file-based, suitable for server environments but not ideal for browsers due to performance and loading issues.

```js
// file: math.js
exports.add = (a, b) => a + b;

// file: main.js
const math = require("./math");
console.log(math.add(2, 3));
```

<b style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">2. AMD (Asynchronous Module Definition) (RequireJS): </b>To address browser requirements, AMD was developed, allowing asynchronous loading of modules. Libraries like RequireJS used AMD, where you define modules with <span style="color: rgb(230, 192, 123);">define()</span> and load dependencies with <span style="color: rgb(230, 192, 123);">require()</span>.

```js
define(["dependency"], function (dependency) {
  var module = {};
  module.doSomething = function () {
    dependency.action();
  };
  return module;
});
```

<b style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">3. UMD (Universal Module Definition): </b>An attempt to create modules that work in both CommonJS and AMD environments, UMD patterns were popular as a transitional solution.

<b style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">4. ES6 Modules (ESM): </b>With ECMAScript 2015 (ES6), native module syntax was introduced to JavaScript, bringing a standardized, browser-compatible module system. This was a significant step towards unifying module handling across environments. Explained below in detail 👇

<div style="border: 2px solid Magenta; padding: 10px;">

In environments like `Node.js`, a single `.js` extension traditionally represented `CommonJS` modules (the older module system). To avoid ambiguity and allow coexistence of both module types in a project, the `.mjs` extension was introduced to clearly identify files as ES6 modules. Browsers do not rely on the `.mjs` extension; they treat files as ES6 modules if loaded with `type="module"` in a `<script>` tag:

</div>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Advantages of using modules</h3>

- <span style="color: Cyan;">Encapsulation:</span> Modules encapsulate functionality, providing a clean separation of concerns and reducing namespace pollution.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">Reusability:</span> Modules can be reused across different parts of an application or even in different applications.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">Maintainability:</span> Organizing code into modules makes it easier to understand, maintain, and debug.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">Dependency Management:</span> Modules allow you to manage dependencies between different parts of your application.

<br>

# Exporting from a Module

You can export functions, `var`, `let`, `const`, and classes. They need to be top-level items: for example, you can't use export inside a function:

<b style="color: Salmon;">Named Exports:</b> You can export specific functions, variables, or objects by name.

```js
export const value1 = 42;
export function greet(name) {
  return `Hello, ${name}!`;
}
export class Person {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
}
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Export apart from declarations:</b> A more convenient way of exporting all the items you want to export is to use a single export statement at the end of your module file, followed by a comma-separated list of the features you want to export wrapped in curly braces. For example:

```js
const value1 = 42;
function greet(name) {
  return `Hello, ${name}!`;
}
class Person {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
}

export { value1, greet, Person };
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Exporting with different names:</b> We can export data with different name using <span style="color: gold;">as</span> keyword.

```js
// inside module.js
export { function1 as newFunctionName, function2 as anotherNewFunctionName };

// inside main.js
import { newFunctionName, anotherNewFunctionName } from "./modules/module.js";
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Default Export:</b> You can export a single default function, variable, or object, which is imported without braces `{}`.

```js
// utility.js
export default function greet(name) {
  return `Hello, ${name}!`;
}
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Re-export:</b> “Re-export” syntax <span style="color: Gold;">export ... from ...</span> allows to import things and immediately export them (possibly under another name), like this:

```js
export { sayHi } from "./say.js"; // re-export sayHi
export { default as User } from "./user.js"; // re-export default
```

`export *` syntax can be used to re-export only named exports, but it ignores the default one. If we’d like to re-export both named and default exports, then two statements are needed:

```js
export * from "./user.js"; // to re-export named exports
export { default } from "./user.js"; // to re-export the default export
```

<br>

# Importing into a Module

You can import functionality from other modules using the `import` statement. Import declarations are hoisted. In this case, it means that the imported values are available in the module's code even before the place that declares them, and that the imported module's side effects are produced before the rest of the module's code starts running.

<b style="color: Salmon;">Named Import:</b> Usually, we put a list of what to import in curly braces `import {...}`, like this:

```js
// app.js
import { add, subtract } from "./math.js";
console.log(add(5, 3)); // Output: 8
console.log(subtract(5, 3)); // Output: 2
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Creating a module object:</b> The above method works OK, but it's a little messy and long-winded. An even better solution is to import each module's features inside a module object. The following syntax form does that:

```js
import * as Module from "./modules/module.js";
```

This grabs all the exports available inside `module.js`, and makes them available as members of an object `Module`, effectively giving it its own namespace. So for example:

```js
Module.function1();
Module.function2();
```

<div style="border: 2px solid red; padding: 10px;">

Modern build tools, such as webpack and others, bundle modules together and optimize them to speedup loading. They also remove unused imports. For instance, if you `import * as library` from a huge code library, and then use only few methods, then unused ones will not be included into the optimized bundle.

</div>

<br>

<b style="color: Salmon;">Import "as":</b> We can also use as to import under different names. For instance, let’s import `sayHi` into the local variable `hi` for brevity, and import `sayBye` as `bye`:

```js
// 📁 main.js
import { sayHi as hi, sayBye as bye } from "./say.js";

hi("John"); // Hello, John!
bye("John"); // Bye, John!
```

<b style="color: Salmon;">Default Import:</b>

```js
// app.js
import greet from "./utility.js";
console.log(greet("Alice")); // Output: Hello, Alice!
```

<br>

# <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddVm53j80vc&list=PLZlA0Gpn_vH85jM1TWO6TdCtSr6ruglWn&index=59&ab_channel=WebDevSimplified">Dynamic Module Imports</a>

The import statements that we looked above are **<u>static imports</u>**. The issue with them is that the code of imported files is downloaded immediately by the browser leading to potentially slow page loads. This is where **<u>dynamic module imports</u>** come in.

Dynamic module imports in JavaScript allow you to load modules conditionally and asynchronously at runtime, rather than having all imports defined statically at the beginning of your scripts. This can be particularly useful for improving performance, reducing initial load times, and handling modules that are only needed under specific conditions.

Dynamic imports are made possible using the <b style="color:Magenta;">import()</b> function, which returns a promise that resolves to the module object.

```js
// Static Import

import User, { printUser } from "./user.js";

// Dynamic Import

import("./user.js")
  .then(({ default: User, printUser }) => {
    // Code that depends on the module
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    // Handle error scenario
  });
```

The default export of the module must actually be destructured from the promise return value. This is why we have the code `default: User` which is mapping the default export to the `User` variable.

Example Scenario: Consider a single-page application (SPA) where certain features or components are only needed under specific conditions -

```js
// main.js
document.getElementById("featureButton").addEventListener("click", async () => {
  try {
    const module = await import("./featureModule.js");
    module.initializeFeature();
  } catch (err) {
    console.error("Failed to load featureModule", err);
  }
});
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Benefits</h3>

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Performance Optimization</b>: Load only the necessary parts of your application when they are needed, reducing the initial load time.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Conditional Loading</b>: Dynamically load modules based on certain conditions, such as user actions or specific runtime environments.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">Code Splitting</b>: With tools like Webpack, dynamic imports can be used to split your code into smaller chunks that are loaded on demand.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">When to use dynamic importing?</h3>

- We can add intersection observer to observe when a component comes onto screen and only then load the JS.
- Importing numerous language related files during internationalization
- Importing tonnes of components during routing
- Prevent unnecessary polyfill downloads

<br>

# Applying the module to your HTML

To apply JavaScript modules to an HTML file, you need to use the <span style="color: Gold;">type="module"</span> attribute in the `<script>` tag. This tells the browser that the script is an ES6 module and should be treated as such.

```html
<script type="module" src="main.js"></script>
```

You can also embed the module's script directly into the HTML file by placing the JavaScript code within the body of the `<script>` element:

```html
<script type="module">
  /* JavaScript module code here */
</script>
```

<b style="color:red;">NOTE:</b> You can only use `import` and `export` statements inside modules, not regular scripts. An error will be thrown if your `<script>` element doesn't have the `type="module"` attribute and attempts to import other modules. For example:

```html
<script>
  import _ from "lodash"; // SyntaxError ❌: import declarations may only appear at top level of a module
  // ...
</script>
<script src="a-module-using-import-statements.js"></script>
<!-- SyntaxError: import declarations may only appear at top level of a module -->
```

You should generally define all your modules in separate files. Modules declared inline in HTML can only import other modules, but anything they export will not be accessible by other modules (because they don't have a URL).

<span style="color: Lime;">Note:</span> Modules and their dependencies can be preloaded by specifying them in <link> elements with `rel="modulepreload"`. This can significantly reduce load time when the modules are used.

<br>

# How are modules different from regular scripts

- Each module has its own scope. Variables, functions, and classes defined within a module are not automatically added to the global scope. You have to import them to use them. Although in the browser, we can make a variable window-level global by explicitly assigning it to a `window` property, e.g. `window.user = "John"`. Then all scripts will see it, both with `type="module"` and without it. That said, making such global variables is frowned upon. Please try to avoid them.
- Modules are deferred automatically, meaning they are executed after the HTML is fully parsed.
- Modules are only executed once, even if they have been referenced in multiple `<script>` tags.
- Modules automatically run in strict mode (`"use strict";` is implied). This means:
  - The top-level `this` is undefined.
  - Can't use variables without declaring it using `const`, `let` or `var`.
- Modules must follow CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) policies due to JS modules' security requirements. So files must be served from an HTTP server. Regular scripts can be run directly from the local file system (`file://` protocol).
- Modules support top-level `await`, allowing asynchronous code at the module level while in regular scripts, `await` can only be used inside `async` functions.

<br>

# Loading non-JavaScript resources

One exciting feature that a unified module architecture brings is the ability to load non-JavaScript resources as modules. For example, you can import JSON as a JavaScript object, or import CSS as a `CSSStyleSheet` object.

You must explicitly declare what kind of resource you are importing using <u>import assertions</u>. By default, the browser assumes that the resource is JavaScript, and will throw an error if the resolved resource is something else. To import JSON, CSS, or other types of resource, use the import attributes syntax:

```js
import colors from "./colors.json" with { type: "json" };
import styles from "./styles.css" with { type: "css" };
```

Browsers will also perform validation on the module type, and fail if, for example, `./data.json` does not resolve to a JSON file. This ensures that you don't accidentally execute code when you just intend to import data. Once imported successfully, you can now use the imported value as a normal JavaScript object or `CSSStyleSheet` object.

For bundler-based environments, in most cases, you can import JSON without assertions.

<br>

# CommonJS (need to learn for Webpack)

`CommonJS` is a module system primarily used in Node.js to structure and manage code by splitting it into reusable, modular parts. It was one of the first widely adopted module systems in JavaScript and remains integral to many Node.js applications. Modules are loaded synchronously in it. This is ideal for server-side environments where scripts are available locally.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Exporting</h3>

Modules can export functionality using <b style="color: SeaGreen;">module.exports</b>.

<b><u>Default export:</u></b>

```js
// file: greetings.js
module.exports = function(name) {
    return `Hello, ${name}!`;
};
```

<b><u>Named export:</u></b>

You can also export parts of a module using <b style="color: SeaGreen;">exports</b>.

```js
// file: utils.js
exports.multiply = (a, b) => a * b;
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Importing</h3>

Modules are imported using <b style="color: SeaGreen;">require()</b>.

<b><u>Importing Default Export (`module.exports`):</u></b>

```js
// file: app.js
const greet = require('./greetings.js');
console.log(greet('Alice')); // Output: Hello, Alice!
```

<b><u>Importing Named Exports (`exports`):</u></b>

```js
// file: app.js
const utils = require('./utils.js');
console.log(utils.multiply(3, 4)); // Output: 12
```

</div>
