<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Arrays

Objects allow you to store keyed collections of values. That’s fine. But quite often we find that we need an ordered collection, where we have a 1st, a 2nd, a 3rd element and so on. For example, we need that to store a list of something: users, goods etc. It is not convenient to use an object here, because it provides no methods to manage the order of elements. We can’t insert a new property “between” the existing ones. Objects are just not meant for such use. There exists a special data structure named Array, to store ordered collections.

There are two syntaxes for creating an empty array:

```js
let fruitsArr1 = new Array("Apple", "Mango", "Grapes");
let fruitsArr2 = ["Papaya", "Dragonfruit", "Orange"];
let arr = new Array(5); // Creates an array with 5 empty slots
```

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid DeepSkyBlue; padding: 10px;">

An array of 5 empty slots looks like this - `[, , , ,]`. It shows weird trend in code:

```js
console.log([, , , ,].length); // 5
[, , , ,].map(() => { console.log('Hi'); }); // Nothing is printed
```

</div>

<br>

If we assign values on random indexes instead of proper order, empty slots are left on unfilled indexes.

```js
const arr = [];
arr[0] = 0;
arr[4] = 4;

console.log(arr); // [ 0, <3 empty items>, 4 ]
```

We can use `for..of`, `for`, `for..in` loops to loop through arrays.

```js
let fruits = ["Apple", "Orange", "Plum"];

for (let fruit of fruits) {
  console.log( fruit );
}
```

An array is a special kind of object. The square brackets used to access a property `arr[0]` actually come from the object syntax. That’s essentially the same as `obj[key]`, where `arr` is the object, while numbers are used as keys. They extend objects providing special methods to work with ordered collections of data and also the `length` property. `delete` operator also works on arrays but it just makes that spot vacant. But at the core it’s still an object. Remember, there are only eight basic data types in JavaScript. Array is an object and thus behaves like an object. For instance, <span style="color: Cyan;">it is copied by reference</span>.

But what makes arrays really special is their internal representation. The engine tries to store its elements in the contiguous memory area, one after another, and there are other optimizations as well, to make arrays work really fast. But they all break if we quit working with an array as with an “ordered collection” and start working with it as if it were a regular object. For instance, technically we can do this:

```js
let fruits = []; // make an array

fruits[99999] = 5; // assign a property with the index far greater than its length

fruits.age = 25; // create a property with an arbitrary name
```

That’s possible, because arrays are objects at their base. We can add any properties to them. But the engine will see that we’re working with the array as with a regular object. Array-specific optimizations are not suited for such cases and will be turned off, their benefits disappear.

The ways to misuse an array:

- Add a non-numeric property like `arr.test = 5`.
- Make holes, like: add `arr[0]` and then `arr[1000]` (and nothing between them).
- Fill the array in the reverse order, like `arr[1000]`, `arr[999]` and so on.

Think of arrays as special structures to work with the ordered data. They provide special methods for that. Arrays are carefully tuned inside JavaScript engines to work with contiguous ordered data, please use them this way. And if you need arbitrary keys, chances are high that you actually require a regular object `{}`.

<h3><u>Playing with arrays</u></h3>

- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`[`pos`]</b>: Array elements are numbered, starting with zero. We can get an element by its number in square brackets.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.at(`pos`)</b>: Returns the element at `pos` just like square bracket but difference is that it can be negative too. `arr.at(i)` is:
    - is exactly the same as `arr[i]`, if `i >= 0`.
    - for negative values of `i`, it steps back from the end of the array i.e. `arr.at(-pos)` = `arr[arr.length - pos]`, pos > 0
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.length</b>: Returns length of the array. It is <span style="color: Cyan;">writable</span>: `arr.length=0` empties the array. Also, <span style="color: HotPink;">empty slots are counted in `length`</span>: `[,,,].length` returns `3`.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.push(`ele1`, `ele2`, `ele3`, ....)</b>: Adds an element at the end. <span style="color: Crimson;">Multiple comma separated values can also be pushed similarly, thus leading to option to push array also using spread operator.</span>
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.pop()</b>: Returns last element and removes it.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.unshift(`ele`)</b>: Adds an element at the beginning.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.shift()</b>: Returns first element and removes it.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.slice(`i`, `j`)</b>: It returns a new array copying to it all items from index `i` to `j` (not including `j`). Both `i` and `j` can be negative, in that case position from array end is assumed. If second index is not provided, it selects elements till the end or start depending on positive/negative first element. If the second number is more that length of array, it doesn't matter, we get elements till end.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.splice(`start`, `deleteCount`, `item1`, `item2`, `item3`...)</b>: Changes the contents of an array by removing or replacing existing elements and/or adding new elements in place. An array containing the deleted elements. If only one element is removed, an array of one element is returned. If no elements are removed, an empty array is returned.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.concat(`arr1`, `arr2`, `val1`, `val2`, .....)</b>: Returns an appended array with the arrays and values passed in `arr` in the order they are provided.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.forEach(function(`item`, `index`) {.....})</b>: Allows to run a function for every element of array.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">indexOf, lastIndexOf, includes</b>: [Same working as strings]
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.find(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: Return the condition. If some condition is satisfied, element itself is returned and search is stopped, otherwise `undefined` is returned.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.some(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: Tests whether at least one element in the array passes the test implemented by the provided function. It returns `true` if, in the array, it finds an element for which the provided function returns `true`; otherwise it returns `false`. It doesn't modify the array.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.findIndex(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: Same as above but returns index of element if found and `-1` if not found.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.findLastIndex(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: Same as above but searches from end.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.filter(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: Returns array of elements satisfying the condition code.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.map(function(`item`, `index`){`....condition_code`})</b>: It calls the function for each element of the array and returns the array of data returned from those functions.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.sort(function(`a`, `b`){`....comparision_code`})</b>: Sorts the array. Also returns the sorted array but that is usually ignored. <span style="color: Cyan;">Note that items are sorted as strings by default i.e. lexicographically, so we have to pass own comparision function for sorting numbers.</span> Actually, a comparison function is only required to return a positive number to say “greater” and a negative number to say “less”.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.reverse()</b>: Reverses the array.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.flat(`depth`)</b>: Returns a new array with all sub-array elements concatenated into it recursively up to the specified depth. Default `depth` value is `1`.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.join(`glue`)</b>: Does reverse of `str.split()`. It returns a string joined by string passed in the argument.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.fill(`val`)</b>: Fills `arr` array with `val`.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`arr`.reduce(function(`accumulator`, `item`, `index`){.....}, [`initialVal`])</b>: Used to calculate a single value based on the array. The function is applied to all array elements one after another and “carries on” its result to the next call. <span style="color: Orange;">One of the major use cases of this function is preparing an object on the basis of an array of objects.</span>
    - `accumulator` – is the result of the previous function call, equals initial the first time (if initial is provided).
    - `item` – is the current array item.
    - `index` – is its position.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">Array.isArray(`arr`)</b>: Returns true if passed arg is array. We can't use `typeof` operator for this because it returns `object` on arrays.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">Array.from(`iterable`)</b>: Takes an iterable or array-like value and makes a <span style="color: Violet;">“real”</span> Array from it. Then we can call array methods on it.

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px;">

<h4><u>Iterables</u></h4>

Iterable objects are a generalization of arrays. That’s a concept that allows us to make any object useable in a `for..of` loop. Of course, Arrays are iterable. But there are many other built-in objects, that are iterable as well. For instance, strings are also iterable. If an object isn’t technically an array, but represents a collection (list, set) of something, then `for..of` is a great syntax to loop over it. Check out this link for details on iterables - https://javascript.info/iterable. 

</div>

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid crimson; padding: 10px;">


<b>`Delete` Operator on array</b>

What will the below code do?

```js
var myChars = ["a", "b", "c", "d"];
delete myChars[0]; // myChars - [empty, 'b', 'c', 'd']
```

The `delete` operator will delete the object property but it will not reindex the array or change its length. So the number or elements or length of the array won't be changed. If you try to print the array then you can observe that it doesn't set an `undefined` value, rather the property is removed from the array. The newer versions of Chrome use `empty` instead of `undefined` to make the difference a bit clearer.

</div>

<br>

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4];

arr.push(5); // arr -> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
arr.unshift(0); // arr -> [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
arr = arr.slice(1, 4); // arr -> [1, 2, 3]
arr = arr.concat([4, 5, 6], 7); // arr -> [1, 2, 3 ,4, 5, 6, 7]
arr.forEach((data, index) => {
   arr[index] = 2 * data; 
}); // arr -> [2,  4,  6, 8, 10, 12, 14]
const item = arr.find(data => data === 6); // item -> 6
arr = arr.filter(data => data < 11); // arr -> [ 2, 4, 6, 8, 10]
arr = arr.map(data => data - 1); // arr -> [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
arr.sort((a, b) => a - b); // arr -> [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
const str = arr.join('-'); // str -> 1-3-5-7-9
const result = arr.reduce((sum, current) => sum + current, 0); // result -> 25

let arrayLike = {
  0: "Hello",
  1: "World",
  length: 2
};

let arr = Array.from(arrayLike); // (*)
alert(arr.pop()); // World (method works)
```

<h3><u>Array destructuring</u></h3>

Array destructuring is a JavaScript feature that allows you to extract values from arrays and assign them to variables in a concise and readable way. It enables you to unpack values from arrays into separate variables, making it easier to work with arrays and their elements. Rest operator is used to do this.

<b><u>Key points</u></b>

- We assign default values to variables in case the array doesn't have enough elements
- Rest operator must be used only at the end, not in the beginning or middle.
- You can skip elements in the array by leaving a blank space between commas.
- Trailing commas are not allowed while using rest operator.

```js
const colors = ['red', 'green', 'blue'];

// Destructuring syntax
const [, secondColor, thirdColor, fourthColor = 'black'] = colors; // skipped first color and fourthColor is default black

console.log(secondColor, ' ', thirdColor, ' ', fourthColor);  // Output: 'green blue black'

const animals = ['cat', 'dog', 'horse', 'lion'];
const [animal1, ...rest] = animals; // rest parameter can be used to collect remaining elements
console.log(animal1); // animal1 -> 'cat'
console.log(rest); // rest -> ['dog', 'horse', 'lion']]

const [a1, , a3] = animals;
console.log(a1, ' ', a3); // 'cat horse'

let [x, ...y, z] = [6, 7, 8, 9]; // ❌
let [a, ...b,] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]; // ❌
```

<br>

# Maps

Maps are collections of keyed data items, just like an objects. But the differences are:

- Keys in plain objects must be strings/symbols. If you try to use other types (like numbers), they are implicitly converted to strings. In maps, it can be anything like objects, functions, primitive type, etc.
- Unlike maps, in plain objects, order of keys is not necessarily preserved.
- Maps are generally used for large collections involving frequent additions and removals. Objects work best with small sets of key-value pairs.
- You can get the size of a Map easily with the `size` property, while the number of properties in an object must be determined manually.

<h3><u>Playing with maps</u></h3>

- <b style="color: Salmon;">new Map([ [`key1`, `val1`], [`key2`, `val2`], ......., [key_n, value_n] ])</b> **/** <b style="color: Salmon;">new Map(`anotherMap`)</b>: creates the map.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.set(`key`, `value`)</b>: stores the value by the key.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.get(`key`)</b>: returns the value by the key, undefined if key doesn’t exist in map.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.has(`key`)</b>: returns true if the key exists, false otherwise.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.delete(`key`)</b>: removes the element (the key/value pair) by the key.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.clear()</b>: removes everything from the map.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.size</b>: returns the current element count.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.keys()</b>: returns a new map iterator object that contains the keys for each element in this map in insertion order
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.values()</b>: returns a new map iterator object that contains the values for each element in this map in insertion order.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.entries()</b>: returns an iterable for entries `[key, value]`, it’s used by default in `for..of`.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`map`.forEach(function(`value`, `key`))</b>: Passed function is called for each key-value pair.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">new Map(Object.entries(`obj`));</b>: Can be used to return a map formed from object `obj` as `Object.entries()` returns an array of key/value pairs for an object exactly in that format.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">Object.fromEntries(`map`)</b>: Can be used to convert map to object. `Object.fromEntries` method  does the reverse of `Object.entries`: given an array of [key, value] pairs, it creates an object from them:

```js
let map = new Map();

map.set('1', 'str1');   // a string key
map.set(1, 'num1');     // a numeric key
map.set(true, 'bool1'); // a boolean key

// remember the regular Object? it would convert keys to string
// Map keeps the type, so these two are different:
console.log( map.get(1)   ); // 'num1'
console.log( map.get('1') ); // 'str1'

console.log( map.size ); // 3

// iterate over [key, value] entries
for (let [key, value] of map) { // the same as of map.entries()
  console.log([key, value]); // cucumber,500 (and so on)
}

map.forEach((value, key) => { // Iteration way
  //.....
})

const map1 = new Map();

map1.set("0", "foo");
map1.set(1, "bar");

const iterator1 = map1.keys();

console.log(iterator1.next().value);
// Expected output: "0"

console.log(iterator1.next().value);
// Expected output: 1
```

<b style="color: red;">NOTE</b>: `map[key]` isn’t the right way to use a `Map`. Although `map[key]` also works, e.g. we can set `map[key]` = 2, this is treating map as a plain JavaScript object, so it implies all corresponding limitations (only string/symbol keys and so on). So we should use `map` methods: `set`, `get` and so on.

<br>

# Sets

A `Set` is a special type collection – “set of values” (without keys), where each value may occur only once.

The alternative to `Set` could be an array of users, and the code to check for duplicates on every insertion using `arr.find`. But the performance would be much worse, because this method walks through the whole array checking every element. `Set` is much better optimized internally for uniqueness checks.

<h3><u>Playing with sets</u></h3>

- <b style="color: Salmon;">new Set([`iterable`])</b>: creates the set, and if an iterable object is provided (usually an array or another set), copies values from it into the set.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.add(value)</b>: adds a value, returns the set itself.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.delete(value)</b>: removes the value, returns true if value existed at the moment of the call, otherwise false.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.has(`value`)</b>: returns true if the value exists in the set, otherwise false.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.clear()</b>: removes everything from the set.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.size</b>: is the elements count.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.forEach(function(`value`){....})</b>: calls passed function for every element of set.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.values()</b>: returns a new set iterator object that contains the values for each element in this set in insertion order.
- <b style="color: Salmon;">`set`.keys()</b>: Same as `set.values`
- <b style="color: Salmon;">Array.from(new Set(`arr`))</b>: returns an array of unique values of `arr`.

```js
let john = { name: "John" };
let pete = { name: "Pete" };
let mary = { name: "Mary" };

let set = new Set([john, pete]);

// visits, some users come multiple times
set.add(mary);

// set keeps only unique values
console.log(set.size); // 3

for (let user of set) {
  console.log(user.name); // John (then Pete and Mary)
}

const set1 = new Set();
set1.add(42);
set1.add("forty two");

const iterator1 = set1.values();

console.log(iterator1.next().value);
// Expected output: 42

console.log(iterator1.next().value);
// Expected output: "forty two"
```

</div>