<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

In JavaScript, the `this` keyword refers to an object. Which object depends on how `this` is being invoked (used or called). The `this` keyword refers to different objects depending on how it is used. Basically the value of `this` depends on in which context it appears: function, class, or global.

# Global scope

When code is executed in the global scope (i.e., not inside any function), value of `this` is `window`, in case of `nodejs`, it is `Global object`. In case of `vs code` or other JS compilers, they have `empty object {}` as global object as they can't afford to implement browser or nodejs global object apis and properties. As it is there for debugging, so empty global object suffices.

```js
console.log(this); // {} / Window / Global object depending on scope
```

<br>

# Regular Functions 

Inside a function, the value of this depends on how the function is called. Think about this as a hidden parameter of a function — just like the parameters declared in the function definition, this is a binding that the language creates for you when the function body is evaluated.

1. <b style="color: Aqua;">Standalone function:</b> In `non-strict mode`, when a regular function is called in the global context (i.e., not as a method of an object or within another function), `this` refers to the `global object` (window in a web browser, global in Node.js). In `strict mode`, when a regular function is called in the global context, `this` is `undefined`.

    ```js
    // Non-strict mode
    function globalFunction() {
        console.log(this);
    }
    globalFunction(); // Output: Window (in a browser)
    ```

    ```js
    // Strict mode
    'use strict';
    function strictGlobalFunction() {
        console.log(this);
    }
    strictGlobalFunction(); // Output: undefined
    ```

2. <b style="color: Aqua;">As a method of object:</b> When a regular function is called as a method of an object, `this` refers to the object itself.

    ```js
    const obj = {
        name: 'Object',
        method: function() {
            console.log(this.name);
        }
    };
    obj.method(); // Output: 'Object'
    ```
3. <b style="color: Aqua;">In constructor function:</b> When a regular function is used as a constructor with the `new` keyword, `this` refers to the newly created object instance.
    ```js
    function Person(name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    const john = new Person('John');
    console.log(john.name); // Output: 'John'
    ```
4. <b style="color: Aqua;">Explicit Binding:</b> When a regular function's `call()`, `apply()`, or `bind()` method is used, `this` is explicitly set to the value passed as the first argument.
    ```js
    const person = {
        name: 'John'
    };

    function greet() {
        console.log('Hello, ' + this.name + '!');
    }

    greet.call(person); // Output: 'Hello, John!'
    ```

<br>

# Arrow functions

Arrow functions do not have their own `this` binding. The value of `this` is lexically bound to the enclosing scope, meaning it retains the value of `this` from the surrounding code where the arrow function is defined. Unlike regular functions, arrow functions do not have their own `this` context. Instead, they inherit `this` from the surrounding lexical context in which they are defined.

- <b style="color: Coral;">Arrow Function in Global Context:</b> If an arrow function is defined in the global scope, `this` inside the arrow function will be the same as `this` in the global scope.

  ```js
  // Arrow function in global context
  const globalArrow = () => {
    console.log("Inside globalArrow, this is:", this);
  };

  globalArrow(); // Output: Inside globalArrow, this is: Window (or global object in Node.js)
  ```

- <b style="color: Coral;">Arrow Function as a Method:</b> If an arrow function is used as a method of an object, `this` inside the arrow function will be the same as `this` in the enclosing scope where the object method is defined, not the object itself.

    ```js
    // Object with a method using arrow function
    const obj = {
      name: "Object",
      method: () => {
        console.log("Inside method, this is:", this);
        console.log("Name:", this.name); // Accesses global object property
      },
    };

    obj.method(); // Output: Inside method, this is: Window (or global object in Node.js)
                 //         Name: undefined
    ```

- <b style="color: Coral;">Arrow Function inside Regular Function:</b> If an arrow function is defined inside a regular function, this inside the arrow function will be the same as this in the regular function.
    ```js
    // Regular function with an arrow function inside
    function regularFunction() {
        console.log('Inside regularFunction, this is:', this);

        const arrowFunction = () => {
            console.log('Inside arrowFunction, this is:', this);
        };

        arrowFunction();
    }

    regularFunction(); // Output: Inside regularFunction, this is: Window (or global object in Node.js)
                      //         Inside arrowFunction, this is: Window (or global object in Node.js)
    ```

- <b style="color: Coral;">Arrow Function inside Constructor:</b> If an arrow function is defined inside a constructor function, this inside the arrow function will be the same as this in the constructor function.

    ```js
    // Constructor function with an arrow function inside
    function Constructor() {
        console.log('Inside Constructor, this is:', this);

        const arrowFunction = () => {
            console.log('Inside arrowFunction, this is:', this);
        };

        arrowFunction();
    }

    new Constructor(); // Output: Inside Constructor, this is: Constructor {}
                      //         Inside arrowFunction, this is: Constructor {}
    ```

<br>

# Event Handler

In event handler functions (e.g., DOM event listeners), `this` often refers to the DOM element that triggered the event. However, this behavior can be different depending on how the event listener is attached.

```js
<button onclick="removeElement(this)">Click to Remove Me!</button>
<script>
function removeElement(elementObj) {
 elementObj.style.display='none';
}
</script>
```

# strict mode

Strict mode is a feature in JavaScript that allows you to place a program or a function in a "strict" operating context. When you use strict mode, certain actions that would otherwise be silently ignored or would fail will instead generate errors, making them easier to find and debug.

You can enable strict mode for an entire script or a specific function by adding the string `"use strict";` at the beginning of the script or function:

```js
"use strict";
....
....
```

OR

```js
function myFunction() {
  "use strict";
  // Code in strict mode
}
```

<b style="color:red;">NOTE:</b> The "use strict" directive is only recognized at the beginning of a script or a function.

Some key features and behaviors of strict mode include:

1. <b style="color: Salmon;">Disallows Implicit Global Variables:</b> In non-strict mode, declaring a variable without the var, let, or const keyword creates a global variable. In strict mode, this behavior is disallowed, and attempting to assign a value to an undeclared variable will result in a ReferenceError.

2. <b style="color: Salmon;">Eliminates `this` Coercion:</b> In strict mode, when a function is called as a standalone function (i.e., not as a method of an object), `this` inside the function is undefined rather than referring to the global object (window in browsers, global in Node.js).

3. <b style="color: Salmon;">Disallows Duplicate Property Names:</b> In strict mode, using the same property name multiple times within an object literal or class declaration will result in a syntax error.

4. <b style="color: Salmon;">Disallows Octal Numeric Literals:</b> In strict mode, octal numeric literals (e.g., 012) are not allowed, and attempting to use them will result in a syntax error.

5. <b style="color: Salmon;">Throws Errors on Invalid Usage:</b> Certain actions that are potentially error-prone or ambiguous in non-strict mode, such as deleting undeletable properties, or using with statements, will result in errors in strict mode.

6. <b style="color: Salmon;">Reserved keywords can't be used as varibles:</b> Keywords which are reserved in javascript like `let`, `const`, `eval`, etc cannot be used as variable names in javascript.

7. <b style="color: Salmon;">Duplicating a parameter name is not allowed:</b> This will cause an error in strict mode - `function x(p1, p1) {};`

8. <b style="color: Salmon;">Deleting a variable or function is disallowed:</b> This will cause error in strict mode - `let x = 3.14;
delete x; `.

Strict mode helps prevent common programming mistakes and encourages best practices by making them explicit. It's recommended to use strict mode in all modern JavaScript code.

</div>

<!-- <div style="background: DarkRed;padding: 0.3rem 0.8rem;"> [HIGHLIGHT] -->
<!-- <h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"> [SUBHEADING] -->
<!-- <b style="color: Chartreuse;"> [NOTE] -->
<!-- <b style="color:red;"> [NOTE-2] -->
<!-- <span style="color: Cyan;"> [IMP] -></span> -->
<!-- <b style="color: Salmon;"> [POINT] -->
